# Authentication

## What is authentication?

Authentication technology provides access control for systems by checking to see if a user's credentials match the credentials in a database of authorized users or in a data authentication server


## Why is authentication important in cybersecurity?
Authentication enables organizations to keep their networks secure by permitting only authenticated users or processes to gain access to their protected resources.


## How does authentication work?

During authentication, credentials provided by the user are compared to those on file in a database of authorized users' information either on the local operating system server or through an authentication server. 


## Authentication vs. authorization

Authorization includes the process through which an administrator grants rights to authenticated users, as well as the process of checking user account permissions to verify that the user has been granted access to those resources. The privileges and preferences granted for an authorized account depend on the user's permissions, which are either stored locally or on an authentication server. 



## What are the different types of authentication?

Traditional authentication depends on the use of a password file, in which user IDs are stored together with hashes of the passwords associated with each user.


Other authentication methods include the following:

- **2FA** systems often require the user to enter a verification code received via text message on a preregistered mobile phone or mobile device, or a code generated by an authentication application.
- **MFA**
- **OTP**
